2.2.1. Parsing the HTML and building the DOM
The page-building phase starts with the browser receiving the HTML code, which is used as a base on top of which the browser builds the page’s UI. The browser does this by parsing the HTML code, one HTML element at a time, and building a DOM, a structured representation of the HTML page in which every HTML element is represented as a node. For example, figure 2.4 shows the DOM of the example page that’s built until the first script element is reached.
Figure 2.4. By the time the browser encounters the first script element, it has already created a DOM with multiple HTML elements (the nodes on the right).
Notice how the nodes in figure 2.4 are organized such that each node except the first one (the root html node ) has exactly one parent. For example, the head node
has the html node
as its parent. At the same time, a node can have any number of children. For example, the html node
has two children: the head node
and the body node . Children of the same element are called siblings. (The head node
and the body node
are siblings.)
It’s important to emphasize that, although the HTML and the DOM are closely linked, with the DOM being constructed from HTML, they aren’t one and the same. You should think of the HTML code as a blueprint the browser follows when constructing the initial DOM—the UI—of the page. The browser can even fix problems that it finds with this blueprint in order to create a valid DOM. Let’s consider the example shown in figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5. An example of invalid HTML that is fixed by the browser
Figure 2.5 gives a simple example of erroneous HTML code in which a paragraph element is placed in the head element. The intention of the head element is that it is used for providing general page information: for example, the page title, character encodings, and external styles and scripts. It isn’t intended for defining page content, as in this example. Because this is an error, the browser silently fixes it by constructing the correct DOM (at right in figure 2.5), in which the paragraph element is placed in the body element, where the page content ought to be.
HTML specification and DOM specification
The current version of HTML is HTML5, whose specification is available at https://html.spec.whatwg.org/. If you need something more readable, we recommend Mozilla’s HTML5 guide, available at https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5.
The DOM, on the other hand, is evolving a bit more slowly. The current version is DOM3, whose specification is available at https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/. Again, Mozilla has prepared a report that can be found at https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model.
During page construction, the browser can encounter a special type of HTML element, the script element, which is used for including JavaScript code. When this happens, the browser pauses the DOM construction from HTML code and starts executing JavaScript code.
