
At some point in your JavaScript life, you've probably heard of JavaScript: The Good Parts. If you haven't, it's a famous book by Douglas Crockford, the inventor of JSON (or the "discoverer", as he calls it). It carves out a subset of the language that's deemed "good", and the rest is discouraged.

For example, Crockford discourages the use of the double-equals operator (==) and instead recommends sticking to the triple-equals operator (===). The double-equals operator does type coercion, which can get complicated and can introduce bugs, while the triple-equals operator works pretty much how you'd expect.

In addition, there are a number of common pitfalls that befall JavaScript developers that aren't necessarily the language's fault. To name a few: missing semicolons, forgetting the var statement, and misspelling variable names.

If there were a tool that enforced good coding style and a tool that helped you fix errors, would you use them? What if they were just one tool? I'll stop you before your imagination runs too wild: there's a tool called JSHint.

JSHint looks at your code and points out what it calls "suspicious usage". It's not technically incorrect to use the double-equals operator or to forget var, but it's likely to be an error.

To install JSHint, you'll install it globally with npm install jshint -g. Now, if you type jshint myfile.js, JSHint will look at your code and alert you to any suspicious usage. For example, take a look at this file:

Listing 10.1  A JavaScript file with a bug

#A Note the forgotten var statement here.

Notice that the second line has an error: we should've written "var result", not just "result". If we run JSHint on this file (with jshint myfile.js), we'll see the following output:

If we see this, we know that something's wrong! We can go back and add a var statement, and then JSHint will stop complaining.

In my opinion, JSHint works best when integrated with your editor of choice. Visit the JSHint download page at http://jshint.com/install/ for a list of editor integrations. Now, you'll see the errors before you even run the code!

Figure 10.1 JSHint integration in the Sublime Text editor. Notice the errors on the left side of the window and the message at the bottom, in the status bar.

JSHint has saved me a ton of time when working with JavaScript and has fixed countless bugs. I know some of those bugs have been security holes.
Enforcing good JavaScript with JSHint