
Node has a number of built-in modules, ranging from file system access in a module called "fs" to utility functions in a built-in module called "util".

A common task when building web applications with Node is parsing of the URL. When a browser sends a request to your server, they'll ask for a specific URL. Perhaps they'll ask for the homepage; perhaps they'll ask for the about page; perhaps they'll ask for something else. These URLs come in as strings but we often want to parse them to get more information about them. Node has a built-in URL parser module; let's use it to see how to require packages.

Node's built-in url module exposes a few functions, but the "big kahuna" is a function called parse. It takes a URL string and extracts useful information, like the domain or the path.

We'll use Node's require function to use the url module. require is similar to keywords like import or include in other languages. require takes the name of a package as a string argument and returns a package. There's nothing special about the object that's returned—it's often an object, but it could be a function or a string or a number. Here's how we might use the URL module:

Listing 2.1 Requiring Node's URL module

#A This requires a module called "url" and puts it in a variable called "url". It's just a convention that these are the same.

#B This uses url.parse. This would throw an undefined error if we didn't have the first line requiring the module.

In the above example, require("url") returns an object that has the parse function attached. Then we use it as we would any object!

If you save this as url-test.js, you can run it with node url-test.js. It will print the protocol, host, and query of our example URL.

Most of the time, when you are requiring a module, you'll put in a variable that has the same name as the module itself. The above example puts the url module in a variable of the same name: url.

But you don't have to do that! We could have put it in a variable with a completely different name, if we wanted. The following example illustrates that:

Listing 2.2 Requiring things into different variable names

It's a loose convention to give the variables the same name as what you're requiring to prevent confusion, but there's nothing enforcing that in code.
Requiring built-in modules