
Let's set up a new Express project. Make a new directory and put a file called package.json inside. Recall that package.json is how we store information about a Node project. It lists simple data like the project's name and author, and also contains information about its dependencies.

Start with a skeleton package.json:

Listing 3.1 A bare-bones package.json

...and then install Express and save it to your package.json:

Running this command will find Express in the directory of third-party Node packages and fetch the latest version. It will put it in a folder called node_modules/. Adding --save to the installation command will save it under the dependencies key of package.json. After running this command, your package.json will look something like this:

Listing 3.2 package.json after installing Express with the --save flag

Alright, now we're ready. Save this file into app.js:

Listing 3.3 "Hello, World" with Express

#A There's a new kid on the block: the express module. We require it just like we require the http module.

#B To start a new Express application, we simply call the express function.

#C This function is called "middleware". As we'll see, it looks an awful lot like the request handlers from before.

#D Start the server up!

Now let's step through this.

First, we require Express. We then require Node's HTTP module just like we did before. We're ready.

Then we make a variable called app like we did before, but instead of creating the server, we call express(), which returns a request handler function. This is important: it means that we can pass the result into http.createServer just like before.

Remember the request handler we had before, with "vanilla" Node? It looked like this:

We have a very similar function in this example (in fact, I copy-pasted it). It's also passed a request and a response object, and we interact with them in the same way.

Next we create the server and start listening. Recall that http.createServer took a function before, so guess what—app is just a function. It's an Express-made request handler that starts going through all the middleware until the end. At the end of the day, it's just a request handler function like before.

NOTE Worth noting that you might see people using app.listen(3000), which just defers to http.createServer. It's just shorthand, like how we shorten request to req and response to res.
"Hello, World" with Express