
A common piece of advice in software development is "don't reinvent the wheel". If someone else has already solved your problem, you should take their solution and move onto better things.

That's what we'll do with our logging middleware. We'll remove the hard work we put in (all five lines) and use a piece of middleware called Morgan (at https://github.com/expressjs/morgan). It's not baked into core Express but it's maintained by the Express team.

Morgan describes itself as "request logger middleware", which is exactly what we want!

To install it, run npm install morgan --save to install the latest version of the Morgan package. You'll see it inside a new folder inside of node_modules and it'll also appear in package.json.

Now, let's change app.js to use Morgan instead of our logging middleware.

Listing 4.8  app.js that now uses Morgan

#A Require Express, just like before.

#B Require Morgan.

#C Use the Morgan middleware instead of the one we used to have.

Now, when you run this app, you'll see output like Figure 4.??, with the IP address and a bunch of other useful information.

Figure 4.6  Our application's logs after adding Morgan.

So…what's happening here?

morgan is a function that returns a middleware function. When you call it, it will return a function like the one you'd written before; it'll take 3 arguments and call console.log. Most third-party middleware works this way—you call a function which returns the middleware, which you then use. You could have written the above like this:

Listing 4.9  An alternative usage of Morgan

Notice that we're calling Morgan with one argument: a string, "short". This is a Morgan-specific configuration option that dictates what the output should look like. There are other format strings that have more or less information. "combined" gives a lot of info—"tiny" gives a very minimal output. When you call Morgan with different configuration options, you're effectively making it return a different middleware function.

Morgan is the first example of open-source middleware we'll use, but we'll use a lot throughout this book. We'll use another one to replace our second middleware function: the static file server.
Switching our logger to an open-source one: Morgan